Cargo feature migrations (#3146)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-cargo-feature-migrations.md

- Feature Name: `cargo-feature-migrations`
- Start Date: 2021-07-01
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Extend Cargo to allow some limited forms of migrations of feature sets to be expressed.
This will allow new features to be added that make existing functionality optional without causing needless breakage.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Problem

Today, Cargo's features most easily support a workflow where features added in new versions of a crate gate new functionality.

> Example: In a new version of a crate, someone creates a new function, and adds it behind a new feature.
> Neither the function nor feature existed in the old version of the crate.

The problem is there is another quite different use case of features: making previously mandatory functionality optional.

> > Example: In a new version of a create, some crates a new feature for a function that *already* existed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Example: In a new version of a crate, someone creates a new feature for a function that *already* existed.
```

> > Example: In a new version of a create, some creates a new feature for a function that *already* existed.

Reviewer 2: typo: create. Probably worth checking more places.

> Before, the export of that function was mandatory, but now it is optional because it can be disabled.

The workflow isn't supported so well: all Cargo offers for it is the notion of "default features", which isn't sufficient for reasons that will be elaborated below.

This second use-case is really important — in fact, perhaps more important.
The key thing aspect about features to realize is that the ultimate *reason* they are used is not to control a crate's interface (exports), but its *dependencies* (imports).

> All things equal, no one minds if a crate provides some extra functionality they don't need.

Reviewer 2: All things are not equal; I care about build time.

Author: I changed to "a little". Please bear with me :) in now way does this proposal cause regressions to the first case, so it shouldn't cause an increase in build times. I just merely want to point out my opinion that the support for the latter use-case is too small given its importance.

We can do it like this:
```toml
[feature-migrations."1.1"]
"all()" = [ "std" ]
```
Yes, that `all()` is a pretty obscure syntax.
It means the "empty intersection"; too bad I cannot use lists (of features) as TOML object keys.
It is supposed to match syntax I proposed in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3143#issuecomment-868829430.
I am fine if we have some sugar for this common case.

For the more involved case from the discussion of alternatives, where we formerly had:
```rust
// 1.1
#[cfg(feature = "foo-feature")]
fn foo();
#[cfg(feature = "bar-feature")]
fn bar();
#[cfg(all(feature = "foo-feature", feature = "bar-feature"))]
fn baz();
```
but now have
```rust
// 1.2
#[cfg(feature = "foo-feature")]
fn foo();
#[cfg(feature = "bar-feature")]
fn bar();
// baz-feature depends on other two
#[cfg(feature = "baz-feature")]
fn baz();
```
we can have migration
```toml
[feature-migrations."1.1"]
"all(foo, bar)" = [ "baz" ]
```
And that's it!
Any migration that matches is applied, they all only "add" features to the requested set.

## Wither default features?

Finally, note that we handled creating a `std` feature without breakage or using `default-features`.

> I suspect most uses of default-features today are also to preserve comparability more than they are a value judgment on what features "ought" to be the default.

Reviewer 3: Typo - might change meaning:
```suggestion
I suspect most uses of default-features today are also to preserve compatibility more than they are a value judgment on what features "ought" to be the default.
```
